[.small]#Â© Copyright 2010-2011 Contributors. All rights reserved.#

== AspectJ 1.6.12 Readme

The full list of resolved issues in 1.6.12 is available
https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/buglist.cgi?query_format=advanced;bug_status=RESOLVED;bug_status=VERIFIED;bug_status=CLOSED;product=AspectJ;target_milestone=1.6.12;[here]

.

=== 1.6.12 released 18-Oct-2011

=== 1.6.12.RC1 available 3-Oct-2011

=== 1.6.12.M2 available 18-Aug-2011

=== 1.6.12.M1 available 7-Jun-2011

=== Notable Changes

==== RC1 - annotation value matching and !=

Prior to this change it was only possible to specify an annotation match
like this: +
 +
get(@Anno(someValue=1) * *) || get(@Anno(someValue=3) * *) +

Now it is possible to use != and write this: +
 +
get(@Anno(someValue!=2) * *) +

This can enable a group of annotated elements to be more easily
identified. +
 +

==== RC1 - More flexible pointcut/code wiring in aop.xml

Prior to this version the wiring was quite limited. In order to wire a
pointcut to a piece of code the user needed to write an abstract aspect
that included an abstract pointcut and some advice attached to that
abstract pointcut. Then compile this aspect and finally write the XML to
concretize the abstract pointcut. With 1.6.12 more flexibility has been
added and for some cases there can be no need for that abstract aspect.

This is a work in progress but now you can write this in the aop.xml:

[source, xml]
....
<concrete-aspect name="MyAspect">
  <before pointcut="execution(* Hello.say2(..)) AND args(message)"
   invokeClass="SomeRegularJavaClass"
   invokeMethod="someMethod(JoinPoint tjp, java.lang.String message)"/>
  <after pointcut="execution(* Hello.say2(..)) AND args(message)"
   invokeClass="SomeRegularJavaClass"
   invokeMethod="someOtherMethod(JoinPoint tjp, java.lang.String message)"/>
</concrete-aspect>

public class SomeRegularJavaClass {

  public static void someMethod(org.aspectj.lang.JoinPoint tjp, String s) {
    System.out.println("in advice4: s="+s+" at "+tjp);
  }

  public static void someOtherMethod(org.aspectj.lang.JoinPoint tjp, String s) {
    System.out.println("in advice5: s="+s+" at "+tjp);
  }
}
....

In this example there is a simple regular java class containing some
static methods. In the XML these can be joined to pointcuts, kind as if
they were advice. Notice in the XML it specifies:

* The pointcut
* The invokeClass - the fully qualified name of the class containing the
Java method
* The invokeMethod - the method, including signature in the specified
class.

Due to the method specification being in XML the parameter types must be
fully specified. The only exception to this rule is that the AspectJ
core types JoinPoint (and JoinPoint.StaticPart) do not have to be fully
qualified (see the example above). *Important:* notice that in the case
above which does argument binding, the names are bound according to the
XML specification, not according to the parameter names in the Java
code.

Around advice is also supported (the return type of the method must
match the joinpoint return type). The example shows after advice,
currently there is no way to specify either after returning or after
finally, there is only after.

Expanding this further would enable support for all the code style
features in the XML. Some of the language features like declare
annotation cannot be done in annotation style aspects but the XML
doesn't have the same kind of restrictions. If anyone wants to help out
by fleshing this area of the weaver out, let me know and I'll help you
get started!

'''''

==== M2 - thisAspectInstance (https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=239649[bug239649])

There is now a new well known name that you can use in the if clauses in
your aspects. thisAspectInstance provides access to the aspect instance.
Here is an example:

[source, java]
....
aspect X {
  boolean doit() {
    System.out.println("In instance check method doit()");
    return true;
  }

  before():execution(* m(..)) && if(thisAspectInstance.doit()){
    System.out.println(thisJoinPoint);
  }
}
....

Now why not just use `X.aspectOf()` instead of `thisAspectInstance`? Well,
`thisAspectInstance` is quite useful when working with abstract/concrete
aspects:

[source, java]
....
abstract aspect X {
abstract pointcut p();

boolean doit() {
    return true;
  }

  before():p()  && if(thisAspectInstance.doit()){
    System.out.println(thisJoinPoint);
  }
}

aspect Y extends X {

  pointcut p(): execution(* m(..));

}
....

Now thisAspectInstance will be an instance of the Y, not X. It enables
the aspect instance to be used in some kind of check/guard that will
avoid the costly creation of a thisJoinPoint object if the advice isn't
going to run. *Note:* right now this only works for singleton aspects.
If you have need of it with other instantiation models, please comment
on https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=239649

==== M2 - weaving groovy

Although we have been successfully weaving groovy for a long time, it is
becoming more popular and a few issues have been uncovered when using
non-singleton aspects with groovy code. These have been fixed.

==== M2 - AJDT memory

The release notes for the last few versions of AspectJ have mentioned
two options (minimalModel and typeDemotion) which can be switched on to
reduce memory consumption. They have had enough field testing now and
from 1.6.12.M2 onwards they are on by default. Users should see a
reduction in memory consumed by AspectJ projects in AJDT. It won't
affect load time weaving. It may also help command line (or Ant) compile
time weaving. If these options cause a problem then please raise a
bugzilla but in the interim you could work around the problem by
actively turning them off by specifying
-Xset:minimalModel=false,typeDemotion=false in the project properties
for your AspectJ project.

==== M2 - Java7 weaving support

Some preliminary work has been done to support Java7. Java7 class files
must contain the necessary extra verifier support attributes in order to
load successfully on a Java7 VM - the attributes were only optional in
Java6. It is possible to force loading of classes missing the attributes
but that requires use of a -XX option. AspectJ 1.6.12.M2 should create
these for you if you weave Java7 level class files. Nothing has been
done yet to rebase AspectJ on a version of the Eclipse compiler that
supports Java7 language constructs - that will happen after Eclipse
3.7.1 is out.

'''''

==== M1 - synthetic is supported in pointcut modifiers https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=327867[327867]

It is now possible to specify synthetic in pointcuts:

[source, java]
....
pointcut p(): execution(!synthetic * *(..));
....

==== M1 - respect protection domain when generating types during weaving https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=328099[328099]

This enables us to weave signed jars correctly. AspectJ sometimes
generates closure classes during weaving and these must be defined with
the same protection domain as the jar that gave rise to them. In
1.6.12.M1 this should now work correctly.

==== M1 - Suppressions inline with the JDT compiler https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=335810[335810]

Starting with Eclipse 3.6, the Eclipse compiler no longer suppresses raw
type warnings with @SuppressWarnings("unchecked"). You need to use
@SuppressWarnings("rawtypes") for that. AspectJ has now been updated
with this rule too.

==== M1 - Optimized annotation value binding for ints https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=347684[347684]

The optimized annotation value binding now supports ints - this is for
use when you want to match upon the existence of an annotation but you
don't need the annotation, you just need a value from it. This code
snippet shows an example:

[source, java]
....
@interface SomeAnnotation {
  int i();
}

before(int i): execution(* *(..)) && @annotation(SomeAnnotation(i)) {
....

Binding values in this way will result in code that runs *much* faster
than using pointcuts that bind the annotation itself then pull out the
value.

Under that same bug some changes were made to match values by name when
binding too. Suppose the annotation had multiple int values, how would
we select which int to bind? AspectJ will now use the name (if it can)
to select the right value:

[source, java]
....
@interface SomeAnnotation {
  int mods();
  int flags();
}

before(int flags): execution(* *(..)) && @annotation(SomeAnnotation(flags)) {
....

Here the use of 'flags' as the name of the value being bound will ensure
the 'flags' value from any SomeAnnotation is bound and not the 'mods'
value.
