[[tools-intro]]
== Introduction to the AspectJ tools

[[eclipse-aspectj]]
=== The Eclipse AspectJ implementation

The xref:../progguide/index.html[AspectJ Programming Guide] describes
the AspectJ language. This guide describes the AspectJ tools produced by
the AspectJ team on http://eclipse.org/aspectj. The AspectJ tools
include - ajc, the compiler/weaver; ajdoc, a documentation tool;
ajbrowser, a crosscutting code viewer; Ant support for ajc; and
load-time weaving support. These tools are delivered in the library
folder of the AspectJ tools installation, mainly in `aspectjtools.jar`
(tools) and `aspectjrt.jar` (runtime). This guide does not describe the
Eclipse AspectJ development tools (AJDT). That is produced by another
team (sharing some members) on
http://eclipse.org/aspectj[http://eclipse.org/ajdt]. AJDT is delivered
as an Eclipse plugin, incorporating the classes in the AspectJ tools
libraries along with the Eclipse plugin interface classes.

Since AspectJ 1.1, the tools have implemented the AspectJ language using
bytecode weaving, which combines aspects and classes to produce .class
files that run in a Java VM. There are other ways to implement the
language (e.g., compiler preprocessor, VM support); the AspectJ team has
always tried to distinguish the language and the implementation so other
groups could build alternative implementations of AspectJ. To that end,
xref:../progguide/implementation.html[The AspectJ Programming Guide,
Implementation Notes] describes how the Java bytecode form affects
language semantics. VM- or source-based implementations may be free of
these limits or impose limits of their own, but most should be fairly
close to what's possible in Java bytecode.

Please be careful not to confuse any description of weaving or of this
implementation of the AspectJ language with the AspectJ language
semantics. If you do, you might find yourself writing code that doesn't
work as expected when you compile or run it on other systems. More
importantly, if you think about aspects in terms of weaving or of
inserting or merging code, then you can lose many of the design benefits
of thinking about an aspect as a single crosscutting module. When the
text below introduces an implementation detail, it will warn if users
make mistakes by applying it in lieu of the language semantics.

[[bytecode-concepts]]
=== Bytecode weaving, incremental compilation, and memory usage

Bytecode weaving takes classes and aspects in .class form and weaves
them together to produce binary-compatible .class files that run in any
Java VM and implement the AspectJ semantics. This process supports not
only the compiler but also IDE's. The compiler, given an aspect in
source form, produces a binary aspect and runs the weaver. IDE's can get
information about crosscutting in the program by subscribing to
information produced by weaver as a side-effect of weaving.

Incremental compilation involves recompiling only what is necessary to
bring the binary form of a program up-to-date with the source form in
the shortest time possible. Incremental weaving supports this by weaving
on a per-class basis. (Some implementations of AOP (including AspectJ
1.0) make use of whole-program analysis that can't be done in
incremental mode.) Weaving per-class means that if the source for a pure
Java class is updated, only that class needs to be produced. However, if
some crosscutting specification may have been updated, then all code
potentially affected by it may need to be woven. The AspectJ tools are
getting better at minimizing this effect, but it is to some degree
unavoidable due to the crosscutting semantics.

Memory usage can seem higher with AspectJ tools. Some aspects are
written to potentially affect many classes, so each class must be
checked during the process of weaving. Programmers can minimize this by
writing the crosscutting specifications as narrowly as possible while
maintaining correctness. (While it may seem like more memory, the proper
comparison would with with a Java program that had the same
crosscutting, with changes made to each code segment. That would likely
require more memory and more time to recompile than the corresponding
AspectJ program.)

[[classpathInpathAndAspectpath]]
==== Classpath, inpath, and aspectpath

AspectJ introduces two new paths for the binary input to the weaver
which you'll find referenced in xref:#ajc-ref[???],
xref:#ajbrowser[???], xref:#antTasks[???], and xref:#ltw[???].

As in Java, the `classpath` is where the AspectJ tools resolve types
specified in the program. When running an AspectJ program, the classpath
should contain the classes and aspects along with the AspectJ runtime
library, `aspectjrt.jar`.

In AspectJ tools, the `aspectpath` is where to find binary aspects. Like
the classpath, it can include archives (.jar and .zip files) and
directories containing .class files in a package layout (since binary
aspects are in .class files). These aspects affect other classes in
exactly the same way as source-level aspects, but are themselves not
affected. When deploying programs, the original aspects must be included
on the runtime classpath.

In AspectJ tools, the `inpath` is where to find binary input - aspects
and classes that weave and may be woven. Like the classpath, it can
include archives and class directories. Like the aspectpath, it can
include aspects that affect other classes and aspects. However, unlike
the aspectpath, an aspect on the inpath may itself be affected by
aspects, as if the source were all compiled together. When deploying
aspects that were put on the inpath, only the woven output should be on
the runtime classpath.

Although types in the inpath and the aspectpath need to be resolved by
the AspectJ tools, you usually do not need to place them on the
classpath because this is done automatically by the compiler/weaver. But
when using the `WeavingURLClassLoader`, your code must explicitly add
the aspects to the classpath so they can be resolved (as you'll see in
the sample code and the `aj.bat` script).

The most common mistake is failing to add `aspectjrt.jar` to the
classpath. Also, when weaving with binary aspects, users forget to
deploy the aspect itself along with any classes it requires. A more
subtle mistake is putting a binary aspect (BA) on the inpath instead of
the aspectpath. In this case the aspect BA might be affected by an
aspect, even itself; this can cause the program to fail, e.g., when an
aspect uses exclusion to avoid infinite recursion but fails to exclude
advice in aspect BA.

The latter is one of many ways that mistakes in the build process can
affect aspects that are written poorly. Aspects should never rely on the
boundaries of the build specification to narrow the scope of their
crosscutting, since the build can be changed without notice to the
aspect developer. Careful users might even avoid relying on the
implementation scope, to ensure their AspectJ code will run on other
implementations.
