= Where to find AspectJ sample code

_Last updated: 2004-04-19 by wisberg_

This contains links to other instances of AspectJ sample code. It
doesn't contain links to all articles that have AspectJ sample code, but
arguably it should.

For a list of publications about AspectJ that might contain sample code,
see the publications link off the AspectJ web site at
http://eclipse.org/aspectj

*"AspectJ in Action"* by Ramnivas Laddad has sample code including
four patterns: the worker object creation pattern, the exception
introduction pattern, the participant pattern, and the wormhole pattern.
Find the code at http://www.manning.com/laddad/.

In the OOPSLA 2002 paper *"Design Pattern Implementation in Java and
AspectJ"*, Jan Hannemann and Gregor Kiczales discuss the implementation
in AspectJ of 23 of the traditional "gang of four" design patterns (from
the book "Design Patterns: elements of reusable object-oriented
software" by Gamma, Helm, Johnson, and Vlissides). Their paper and the
code for those patterns are available from
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~jan/AODPs/. The code is also available from the
AspectJ web site as ubc-design-patterns.zip. The latest version is
checked into the CVS repository along with other sample code at
`org.aspectj/modules/docs/sandbox/ubc-design-patterns`. For instructions
on downloading code from the CVS repository, see the
doc/faq.html#q:buildingsource[FAQ entry "buildingsource"].

The https://atrack.dev.java.net/[*aTrack project*] aims to create an open
source bug tracking application that demonstrates use of Aspect-Oriented
Programming (AOP) with AspectJ. It uses AOP pragmatically to provide
systematic support for technical, middleware, and business concerns.

The http://sourceforge.net/projects/cricketcage/[*CricketCage project*]
automatically creates JUnit TestCases for repeatable bugs and test
scenarios. Include Cricket Cage's AspectJ code to install a code
generator, then run the program to generate the TestCase.
